foreign
so I want to start off tonight's
discussion
going through memory lane on all of the
social media and communication apps and
platforms that we've used since the 90s
so if you've ever used a social media or
a communication platform I want you to
just share with me what you've used so
I'll start off I've used MSN Messenger
and I know that's probably so that a lot
and I know that's probably so that a lo
of you don't even know what that is so
that's what we want to start off with
what have you used
icq nice okay go ahead yeah
you use the MSN
you didn't use it but you know what it
you didn't use it but you know what i
is you read it like an encyclopedia got
is you read it like an encyclopedia go
it what else have you guys used and
continue to use yeah
Blackberry Messenger okay I haven't
Blackberry Messenger okay I haven'
heard that one in a long time sisters
whatever you used and continue to use
you can say the obvious ones as well
Instagram okay excellent Facebook
sisters on Facebook okay what else
Snapchat okay Tick Tock who's on Tick
Tock over here
okay go ahead sir you want to say
something yeah
Twitter okay excellent
all good
or good time tell me what that is I've
never heard of it
never heard of i
and is it just like a chat platform or
what is it okay
it's like Facebook
free Facebook interesting okay go ahead
come on bro you can't make stuff up what
come on bro you can't make stuff up wha
is nexopia
foreign
a long time ago
okay got you got you got you what else
what are we missing
Yahoo chat messenger okay
Myspace oh I have not heard that in a
long time
what else
Skype okay yeah you Skype what's up
those are the obvious ones yeah
Viber okay is anyone on Discord anyone
use Discord over here a few people a lot
use Discord over here a few people a lo
of the younger people seem to be on
Discord these days okay alhamdulillah
okay I just wanted to get those out
okay I just wanted to get those ou
there just to show you the the different
there just to show you the the differen
varieties and how back in time we're
actually talking about like MSN
Messenger
we're talking about like 1992 1993 like
around that time it's a very very long
time ago icq I think may have been even
earlier than that subhanallah so it's
crazy to think how back time uh social
media goes back so for the series of our
discussions and we're going to be
together building for four weeks maybe
five depending on how things play out
five depending on how things play ou
the fifth week is a contingency week and
the layout of the ground is we're going
to be basing our discussions on this
book called the [__] off social media by
Omar Oshman and I want to tell you just
Omar Oshman and I want to tell you jus
very quickly uh about this brother this
brother martial is uh your average
individual in the sense that he hasn't
individual in the sense that he hasn'
gone to study traditionally anywhere he
didn't go to Allah he didn't go to
Medina University he didn't graduate
from alone but he was just a very active
brother growing up in his community he
spent a lot of time with various
Scholars and he spent a lot of time
self-studying and attending local
programs as well and this shows you
subhanallah that one should never
underestimate their own capability and
should never minimize the contribution
that you can make to your community and
to society as well that even though such
a desperately needed topic like the [__]
of social media
we haven't seen a scholar write about
we haven't seen a scholar write abou
this topic we haven't seen a scholar do
a series of lectures on it we have a
brother from Dallas Texas mashallah very
capable very you know enthusiastic and
self-motivated he's the one that came up
with this so I think this is something
to Aspire for that never underestimate
your own value and your own capability
and we pray that Allah makes this heavy
on his scale of Good Deeds so I want to
read out the chapters that he has and
then start with the introduction of the
book which was given by Sheikh abdana
so all together there's 14 chapters in
this book chapter number one is the
intention chapter number two is
friendship chapter number three is the
phone reflect the cathor publicizing
sins family Envy
change Echo Chambers no siha two faces
spirituality and optimism and just to
give you an idea like chapter number one
is two pages long so even though it
is two pages long so even though i
seems like there's a lot of chapters the
actual chapters itself are really really
short what I really like about this book
is that this book isn't there to tell
you this is halal and this is Haram and
this is how you should be dictating your
life but it really focuses on
establishing principles that you should
navigate your life by and this is
something that's really important to
understand that oftentimes when we think
and we'll we'll talk about this in
chapter one that when something is halal
we should automatically pursue it but
we should automatically pursue it bu
what we fail to understand is that
what we fail to understand is tha
sometimes something can be Halal in a
generic sense but it's not Halal for you
so to give you like a food example
eating peanuts is
eating peanuts but if you have a severe
peanut allergy you should not ought to
be eating peanuts in fact eating peanuts
for you at that hot at that time
actually becomes Haram for you so now if
you tie this into social media yes we
can say social media as a general rule
maybe and that's something we'll be
exploring together
but it doesn't mean it's the right thing
for you to use based upon your own
habits based upon your own uh individual
personality that perhaps you become very
obsessive with it perhaps you can't
obsessive with it perhaps you can'
control yourself uh over it and then
maybe it's not right for you to use even
though it may be generally Halal so
that's what I like about these guiding
principles that it helps us navigate our
lives through principles as opposed to
giving us specific rules that we're
looking for so that's something to keep
in mind that if you came to look for hey
my child has a phone addiction you know
this halaka is going to solve this
problem no it's not but what this
hadakah will do is to give you tools so
that when you go back home you can have
a fruitful and beneficial discussion
with your own child you can have your
fruitful and beneficial discussion with
your own child so let's start off with
the Ford so the forward of this book was
written by Sheikh Abdullah a very famous
scholar from the United States of
America he runs column Seminary and
mashallah he's done a great job of how
helping produce the next generation of
North American Scholars I'm not sure if
some of you may remember but one of our
local khatibs over here uh brother munib
sarmat you know masha'allah he memorized
the Quran over here he studied here for
a long time but now he's gone to the
states he's a youth director in the
Masjid in Texas but he is also in his
like fourth year at the column seminar
he's also in his fourth year at the
khalam Seminary so they are doing a very
good job in trying to produce the next
good job in trying to produce the nex
generation of Scholars and they also do
a great job of various online activities
so they have an intensive Sarah course
an intensive Arabic course and they also
do international travel as well like
umrah and then Istanbul and some other
places as well so do check them out if
you haven't heard of them before it's
called column Institute based out of
Dallas Texas
so in his forward
he highlights some things that I want to
start off uh discussing with you
how do we understand what a human being
is how do we understand what a human
being is so he says the logicians Define
the human being in Arabic as a Taiwan
and natak the animal that has been
endowed with speech he highlights this
point because once you have a certain
ability it is only normal that you will
want to use that ability so our defining
characteristic between us and animals is
not just the ability to communicate but
not just the ability to communicate bu
it is the ability to articulate so
communicate I can say you will go like
this and you'll understand
mean it means come here but I can also
say can you please come and sit down
next to me and I can become more
specific so that ability to articulate
is what differentiates us from Human
from the animals and this is how he
starts off with so now this necessity of
wanting to communicate it will manifest
wanting to communicate it will manifes
itself in different ways so early on you
were very restricted you can either
speak to a person you can write letters
and that's pretty much all you can do
but now as technology advances you can
do a wide variety of things you can
communicate through an avatar you can
you know type text messages you can send
voice notes you can do a variety of
different things and then he quotes the
verses from which I believe are very
befitting to start off with so Allah he
starts off by saying
that meaning the source of all Mercy and
he taught mankind the Quran and he
created Mankind and then he taught
created Mankind and then he taugh
mankind bayang he taught mankind how to
articulate themselves and to speak for
themselves so now if you look at these
set of verses all
of the blessings at the beginning of
the head of all those blessings is that
the head of all those blessings is tha
your lord is and this is something very
important to think about particularly
when we get to social media because so
many mistakes are easily made on social
media it's befitting that Allah reminds
us that he is the source of all Mercy
and then he taught us the Quran meaning
that the Quran is meant to be our guide
throughout life and the way that we
conduct ourselves an Emmanuel of living
and then he created mankind so greater
than the creation of mankind was the
fact that Allah taught us the Quran and
then the last thing that Allah mentions
for the sake of our discussion
is that he taught mankind how to
articulate and how to speak and this is
what the prophet saw Allah tells us
that indeed from some speech is Magic
meaning the impact that speech will have
on an individual and can have on certain
people is almost like magic the way that
people is almost like magic the way tha
we can manipulate and influences
people's emotions and the way that they
think through speech is absolutely
phenomenal subhanallah so this is a gift
phenomenal subhanallah so this is a gif
from Allah that if you're able to use it
from Allah that if you're able to use i
towards good you will be rewarded but if
you use it towards evil you will be
punished you will be punished and if you
remember going back to our discussions
on emotional intelligence when we got to
the topic of moral intelligence we said
that was the distinguishing
characteristic between what a Believer
should be doing versus what someone evil
would be doing the believer guides by
moral intelligence meaning not only do
we want to influence people but we want
we want to influence people but we wan
to influence people towards what is best
to influence people towards what is bes
for their Dunya and akhara and same
thing over here when you have the
ability to communicate you want to make
sure that your communication is bringing
you closer to Allah and your
interactions with other people is also
bringing them closer to Allah
now I want to start off by posing a
question to you and I want to get your
brains thinking
is social media real life or not
is social media real life or no
is social media real life or not raise
your hands and share an answer with me
of what you think
go ahead yep
of course so the brother says that no
it's not because you have the ability to
pretend and the ability to make up and
portray that which is not real go ahead
doctors
in the other people who focus on the
reality of life
excellent so our brother says that they
both are are possible go ahead in the
back yeah
um
value excellent
excellen
excellent so it's an extension of
reality go ahead yeah
no one is posting their failures
but I I don't know if I agree with that
but I I don't know if I agree with tha
I mean I think very few people will post
I mean I think very few people will pos
their failures but I completely get your
point I completely get your point we'll
come back to you sisters what do you
think is social media reality or not
think is social media reality or no
go ahead yeah
okay
okay so it's a mixture of both excellent
okay so it's a mixture of both excellen
other sisters go ahead yeah
oh that is too deep
so it's a shadow but not a reflection
that is very fascinating and that's
going to take a long time to for me to
ponder but I love it
ponder but I love i
any other sisters what do you guys think
real not real no it's not real why are
you saying nodding your head
you will you can agree with everybody
we've had contradictory answers
okay you agree with the statement of it
okay you agree with the statement of i
being fake
excellent so I I think a level of
literacy is already present that social
media is very very manipulative and
regardless on where we stand on this
issue is social media real or not what
issue is social media real or not wha
we do need to understand is that the
impact of social media is very very real
the impact of social media is very very
real and this is
he says we often hear that social media
isn't real life but it is a reflection
of it it can feel artificial and distant
of it it can feel artificial and distan
like staring into a mirage but its
effects on our lives uh it affects our
lives in a very real way it affects our
lives in a very real way so you'll see
something on social media I'll make you
decide we'll see another thing on social
media it'll make you happy you know
you'll see another thing on social media
and it'll make you laugh uh you know I
remember reading something on Instagram
today I'm not sure if you guys have been
following the World Cup in Qatar but
following the World Cup in Qatar bu
initially they had allowed the
consumption of beer and now just Within
These last 48 hours there's like no more
beers going to be so showed at the
stadium so uh there's this uh like Point
stadium so uh there's this uh like Poin
account on Instagram I can't remember
what it was called but he's like the
only beer you'll be getting at the World
Cup now is Tak beer and I thought that
Cup now is Tak beer and I thought tha
was really funny
so like that's the impact that it has
right it has the ability to change your
mood and has a very real impact on your
life subhanallah and the more you start
life subhanallah and the more you star
to relate to what you're following the
greater the impact it will have and this
is what we'll be talking about in
chapter two particularly when it comes
to Envy particularly when it becomes to
obsessively following someone's
day-to-day life and the impact that it
day-to-day life and the impact that i
will have on you so we can argue and
debate is it real or not but it's
something that we'll all agree upon is
that the impact is very very real and
this portion he says something very very
profound he says this is largely due to
the major benefits of social media being
Economic and Business related while the
harms are primary spiritual emotional
psychological and social so now as we
get into this discussion you know is
social media good is social media bad he
makes a very valuable point that if you
look at the uh who actually benefits and
profits from social media it is the
major core operations right it is a
great way to make money it is a great
great way to make money it is a grea
way to advertise it is a great way to
Market it is a great way to sell things
but then when you look at the adverse
effects these adverse effects in very
few cases will impact the corporation so
there's a major Scandal people boycott
there's a major Scandal people boyco
that Corporation they create a campaign
against a company that Corporation and
then you know what people cut that
then you know what people cut tha
Corporation out and it has a negative
impact on them but if you look at normal
regular negative impact it's often that
regular negative impact it's often tha
the individuals that use social media
primarily spiritual meaning that it'll
have an impact on your Iman this can be
in the form of jealousy this can be in
the form of over consumption this can be
in the form of looking at things that
in the form of looking at things tha
are Haram that you shouldn't be looking
at then he talks about emotional right
at then he talks about emotional righ
that these are things that will have an
impact on your emotional life as well
may you wishing that you had someone
else's life you not being content with
your own life developing a sense of
ingratitude psychological that these
pictures are so
um
what's the word I'm looking for not
what's the word I'm looking for no
photoshopped but like uh
edited that they're so edited that it
edited that they're so edited that i
has an impact on your self-image then
why can't I look as good as this why can
I not look you know as presentable as
this and then even social that if you
look at how connected people are through
social media we haven't lived in a
generation where people have felt more
alone and why is that even though we're
more connected than ever why is it that
more connected than ever why is it tha
we're feeling more alone than ever so
you look at some of these negative
ramifications that social media will
have and then the last part I'll share
from his forward he says however I
cannot deny that it is embedded in
people's lives and cultures and
therefore extremely difficult to avoid
and I think this really hits home for
parents because particularly when we
have the discussion when should we allow
our children to start using social media
ideally we think let's try to delay it
ideally we think let's try to delay i
as long as we possibly can right let's
not let them use social media because
we're trying to protect them but what
we're trying to protect them but wha
we're not seeing is that sooner or later
it is inevitable it is inevitable that
it is inevitable it is inevitable tha
your children will end up on social
media
so how do we navigate through that issue
when we talk about family we'll be
talking about to that issue as well
so now this leads us into chapter number
one which is about intention and he
begins with the famous Hadith of the
Prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
that indeed actions are by intentions
and every person will be rewarded
according to what he has intended now
Scholars traditionally began with this
Hadith to remind ourselves of the
importance of intention in all aspects
of life
and I think we need to understand the
value of intention over here and I'll
briefly talk about this is that there
are certain things that you have to have
an intention of worship to Allah
if you don't you are sinful so when the
time comes for Salah your intention has
to be to worship Allah if your intention
isn't there to worship Allah you are
actually sinful for doing that action
and not having the intention to worship
Allah
then you have those uh actions that are
neutral within of themselves that
neutral within of themselves tha
they're not punishable nor are they
rewardable based upon their normative
state but based upon your intentions now
it can have an impact in terms of reward
and Punishment so for example you're
eating if your intention is to eat to
get energy for the sake of Allah you
will be rewarded you're going to sleep
with the intention of I can wake up
early for Fajr and wake up for piano and
you will be rewarded for your sleep at
you will be rewarded for your sleep a
that time so now let's bring this into
the world of social media we're not even
going to talk about is social media good
or bad yet but let's just talk about our
own intentions
if someone goes on to social media with
the intention of I'm going to create a
fake Avatar and I'm going to bully
people and I'm going to make fun of them
and I'm going to make them feel
insignificant and make them feel bad
about themselves
this is something that a person will be
punished for they will be eligible for
punishment and they will be sinful for
that you have another individual that
that you have another individual tha
says you know what
says you know wha
because of my personality I can't go out
because of my personality I can't go ou
and give thou art a people but I feel a
lot more comfortable standing in front
lot more comfortable standing in fron
of a camera and giving dawa in front of
a camera because I don't have to
interact with day-to-day people so their
goal is to purely give dawah and you
have quite a few of these brothers and
sisters that are doing a a great job on
social media that they literally just
social media that they literally jus
use their platforms to give dawa and to
educate people about Islam so those
people are being rewarded and then I
feel we have the vast majority of all of
us that from time to time we will fall
into Haram from time to time we will do
something good where we will be rewarded
but the reminder we need to have is that
but the reminder we need to have is tha
we always need to come back to our
intentions
that when we download Instagram when we
download Facebook when we download Tick
Tock when we download Discord when we
download any of these things what is Our
intention in doing so
and you have to constantly keep coming
back to it that maybe your intention
early on was for something good okay
this is where my classmates are this
we're going to have our group
discussions but once your class is over
and your group discussion is over you
still have the app you're still using it
still have the app you're still using i
have you went and gone back and
reflected on what your intention is now
or is it something that you just
or is it something that you jus
continue to live on with without
continue to live on with withou
checking your intention and this is
something that is so important to keep
coming back to that perhaps we had good
intentions early on but those good
intentions didn't stay with us and once
our intentions changed then maybe it's
time we reconsider using certain social
media apps based upon the impact that
media apps based upon the impact tha
they have based upon the impact that
they have based upon the impact tha
they have
he mentioned something very uh
phenomenal for me at least he says that
phenomenal for me at least he says tha
1985 is the dividing line in terms of
how people think about technology and he
quotes uh uh the author of a book called
digital natives
1985 was that line meaning that prior to
1985 you didn't have the ability to see
regularly who was calling you on the
other side you wanted directions you had
to look at a map or stop at a local gas
station and ask for directions right
station and ask for directions righ
there was no GPS at that time so people
born before 1985 lived a very different
born before 1985 lived a very differen
lifestyle and people born after 1985
lived a very different lifestyle so even
in terms of the way that we take notes
in school for me growing up there was no
concept of a laptop until you know
college prior to college everything is
handwritten notes everything was
handwritten notes at that time so even
in the way that we took uh notes has a
huge impact and for me that's very
phenomenal to think
because time is really going very fast
because time is really going very fas
you know we have to come up with these
new things of you know 20 30 is the new
20 and 40 is a new 30 and 50 is like the
new 40 whatever it may be we want to
feel younger but the reality is you
cannot change and go back in time and
you have to embrace what it is so if you
are born in the 1980s you're 14 you're
40 years old right now right 1980 you're
42 years old 1990 you're 32 years old
two thousand two thousand pre-911 still
but you're 22 years old one year later
and you've completely outlived the whole
pre-911 Muslim experience which is in
fact no to understand because it was one
of the most life-changing Monumental
experiences for Muslims but this is the
reality of time this is the reality of
time on how a decade can make a massive
difference in the way that you view the
world
now we get to our next discussion and he
quotes someone by the name of Simon uh
Maine wearing a thought leader in the
space of social media and his quote is
like all technology social media is
neutral but is best put to work in the
service of building a better world
how do you guys feel about this
statement that social media is neutral
do you guys agree with the statement
do you guys agree with the statemen
that social media is neutral
raise your hand and share your answer go
ahead
so you believe that social media is
neutral excellent go ahead yeah
that is a great question
that is a great question so based on how
you feel on who the product is and who
the consumer is that'll have an impact
the consumer is that'll have an impac
on your answer
go ahead
I do
righ
so if you were to summarize it in a yes
or no is social media neutral or not
it depends on how you're using it okay
excellent go ahead
excellen
foreign
very valid point so the sister's point
very valid point so the sister's poin
was that at any point when you're using
it to profit it by default no longer
becomes neutral by default no longer
becomes neutral and I think this is
something that's important to think
about so now let's start off from the
Islamic principle in filk were often
taught that matters of the Sedonia are
Halal until proven Haram we're often
taught that matters of this Dunya are
Halal until proven whereas matters of
worship they are Haram until proven
halal
so examples you find this drink it is
halal for you to consume it up until you
have evidence that it's Haram for you to
consume it whereas when it comes to
ibada you are not allowed to worship
Allah
except until you find evidence first
except until you find evidence firs
that this is how the prophet salallahu
alaihi wasallam
used to do it so now this principle is
not often presented in in the right way
and what I want to explain that with is
that the ass
that in things that you can prove their
utility and their benefit then they are
permissible until proven otherwise
but if you are not able to prove its
utility and benefit then there is there
then you stop and you make an analysis
to prove utility and benefit or to prove
harm and based upon that you will make a
decision
and I think this is where when we
approach social media from a utility
based point of view from a benefit and
harms point of view
can we change the ruling of social media
based upon the negative impact that it
based upon the negative impact that i
is height right now it's great that
is height right now it's great tha
you're able to connect with your local
Scholars and the speakers that you love
to connect with it's great that you can
get a whole bunch of you know Muslim
content even though you may live in a
very isolated part of the world where
there are no Muslims these are all great
there are no Muslims these are all grea
things and things that are considered uh
a merit but at the end of the day if you
look at the overall harms of social
media whether it is the amount of time
that you use spiritual psychological
economical right the amount of time that
economical right the amount of time tha
is wasted on social media as opposed to
being productive at work you know goes
into the trillions of dollars every year
subhanallah and the corporations need to
figure out ways in terms of how to
mitigate social media usage by their
employees
so I think we need to take a deeper look
at this is social media actually
something neutral
and then if it's not neutral where does
it lie and I can understand that the
answer to this is going to be quite
subjective that everyone will have a
different answer to this but again it's
one of those things that you need to
reflect upon and you need to think about
reflect upon and you need to think abou
and answer this question for yourself
that is social media having a positive
influence on my life or is it causing me
harm is it causing me distress is it
harm is it causing me distress is i
causing me to fall into Haram and then
based upon that make a decision
something that he mentions that I really
really like is that because he's coming
from a neutrality standpoint that social
media is neutral then he says that its
best usage is to make the world a better
place
and this is where when you go back to
the intention if you go back to the way
that you use social media I want us to
think about this that how are we
enhancing civilization how we're
enhancing Humanity as a whole how are we
enhancing the Muslim Community how are
we enhancing our local community how am
I enhancing myself right oftentimes you
will love to lurk and we love to see
what's happening in other people's lives
but no benefit is being brought out of
that at the end of the day what benefit
that at the end of the day what benefi
are you getting and I mean it's in a
very generic sense in terms of what
very generic sense in terms of wha
shoes someone is wearing or what clothes
they are wearing or you know what what
they are wearing or you know what wha
they're having for breakfast and then
you liking that image to have some sort
you liking that image to have some sor
of interaction with it
of interaction with i
like where is The Logical thought
like where is The Logical though
process behind all of this right the
senseless scrolling up and down through
Instagram that takes place
where is The Logical thought process
behind is this getting me closer to
Allah or is it getting any further that
Allah or is it getting any further tha
logical thought process gets taken away
and that's what we want to try to bring
back that's what we want to try to bring
back
then he says the focus of this book is
understanding the framework of Islam
that Islam gives us for managing our
relationship with technology and social
media and therefore not about specific
platforms that come and go so this is
why we started with that exercise of you
know speaking about icq and MSN
Messenger and Yahoo messenger those are
irrelevant no one uses those anymore if
we spoke about those specific platforms
what we're going to discuss is no longer
relevant so what we want to look at is
even bigger than the platforms itself
and they are the principles and they are
the principles and something I want to
just quickly go over to prove the point
just quickly go over to prove the poin
that these social media platforms are
not neutral is look at the way the
elections were manipulated look at the
way the 2016 U.S elections were
manipulated by the Russian government
manipulated by the Russian governmen
still an ongoing investigation but the
advertisements that were used to Target
advertisements that were used to Targe
you the consumer so whether you search
for something or not they were able to
Target you as a consumer with their ads
based upon pages that you have liked
based upon certain words that you have
typed based upon certain things that
typed based upon certain things tha
you've looked up they were able to
Target you you look in terms of
right-wing extremism there's a plethora
of lawsuits against meta right now based
on this very concept of someone looked
at one video and it just kept on Pro
prompting more videos of right-wing
extremism till a person actually felt
extremism till a person actually fel
that their identity was a threat that
that their identity was a threat tha
you know Brown and colored people are
taking over the world and if I don't
taking over the world and if I don'
stand up for my white Brethren you know
we're going to lose our our national
identity and control of the country that
identity and control of the country tha
is so near and dear to our hearts right
is so near and dear to our hearts righ
so you see these Echo chambers that end
up building up and therefore clearly it
up building up and therefore clearly i
is not neutral and I think you have to
keep this at the Forefront of your mind
as well that as many of you have
mentioned based upon your searches that
mentioned based upon your searches tha
is what your algorithms will provide for
you
so if you're not looking beneficial
stuff
you're just going to keep getting a
whole bunch of nonsense
so you type you know cute kitten video
that's what your feed is going to be for
the next week man you type in something
Haram it's going to be like that you
type in you know what's Kanye West I'll
do today you'll get all the crazy stuff
that he's been up to right and this is
what the danger of the algorithm is that
what the danger of the algorithm is tha
you look up one thing because you're
curious and there's nothing wrong with
being curious but understand the impact
being curious but understand the impac
of your curiosity and how it can ruin
your feed literally for weeks literally
for weeks so it's very important to
understand the lack of neutrality in
tha
and then he concludes chapter number one
by saying the intention is to stay
focused on the bigger picture principles
that will equip a person with the
correct mindset and approach no matter
how much actual Technologies and
platforms change so let's summarize two
principles we want to leave chapter
number one with number one going back
and checking our intentions in terms of
why we're using these social media
platforms perhaps we had good intentions
when we started off but they're no
longer there or perhaps we had bad
intentions but let's switch them to Good
Intentions so that we can actually be
rewarded for our usage of social media
and then number two understanding the
lack of neutrality on the social media
platforms itself and once you are aware
that these are easily manipulated you
have to be very very careful of the
things that you look at and the things
that you search for and I we only spoke
about the searching part but if you look
at Instagram Instagram actually has the
ability to monitor what image you're
looking at how long you look at it for
before you scroll so the next time you
go to the home button and all those
images are there it is not only based
upon what you searched for but also on
as you are scrolling how long did you
spend looking at this particular image
what is the closest possible image to it
what is the closest possible image to i
and then that's what I'm going to
provide to you again because they are
making money off of your usage of these
platforms the more time that you spend
on these platforms the more money they
can collect from advertising companies
to Market their products to you based
upon your usage of it so intention and
neutrality are the two principles that
neutrality are the two principles tha
we want to leave with with chapter
number one
and we're going to start chapter number
two and Vietnam try to get through as
much of it as we possibly can so now
chapter number two is entitled
friendship
but in my usage
uh in my
um going through the chapter
I would reframe the the topic it's more
about what are you exposing yourself to
what are you exposing to yourself to and
we'll start off with the two Hadith that
we'll start off with the two Hadith tha
he uses as the basis of our discussion
so the first hadithi quotes is that the
prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam says
the similitude of a of good company and
that of Bad Company is that of the musk
perfume seller and of the blacksmith the
musk seller would either offer you some
free of charge or you would buy it from
him or you smell its pleasant fragrance
as for the blacksmith he either burns
your clothes or you smell something
repugnant or you smell something
repugnan
is telling us the impact that good
companionship and bad companionship will
have Upon Us good companionship you'll
either leave at least smelling something
good or they'll rub it off on you or
they'll give you something as well bad
companionship is that you could get
companionship is that you could ge
burnt by the fire or if you don't get
burnt by the fire or if you don't ge
burnt by the fire at the very least you
end up leaving and smelling bad and
obviously these are uh metaphorical in
the sense of the impact that they have
in terms of our companionships but it's
about the impact that they will have on
their day-to-day lives then the second
Hadith he mentions is a man is upon the
religion of his friend so that one of
you look at whom he befriends that one
of you look at at whom he befriends now
you bring this into the world of social
media it's not about who you're
friending but it's about who are you
allowing yourself to be exposed to who
are you allowing yourself to be exposed
to so even though he mentions friendship
early on Facebook had this concept of
friendship requests but it's not just
friendship requests but it's not jus
about friendship requests anymore it's
about who are you choosing to follow who
are you allowing yourself to be exposed
to
so now with that introduction of
exposure and who are you allowing
yourself to be exposed to I want to
share the first quote over here he says
social media was not only a
communication Revolution but it was a
friendship and relationship Revolution
never before in human history have
people been able to uh make more
friendships at such a large scale
without any prior relationship without
without any prior relationship withou
any prior relationship so you can join a
chat group and the Very fact that you
get to choose what the theme and topic
of this chat group is on something like
Discord uh or even on like Facebook
pages you've already established a
commonality and through that commonality
of hey we both like the same show we
both like the same sports team we both
like you know this brand of clothing
whatever it may be you've already
established a commonality so that
established a commonality so tha
commonality leads to a relationship and
that relationship can easily lead to a
friendship that relationship can easily
lead to a friendship the speed and pace
of friendships has changed drastically
in a traditional friendship you're
exposed to personal details over time in
the digital age what used to take months
to learn about a person is now instant
to learn about a person is now instan
you meet people at an event add them on
social media and suddenly you know their
whole life you can see every place that
whole life you can see every place tha
they vacationed what each of their
family members looks like their favorite
sports team which sport which
restaurants they frequent what is what
restaurants they frequent what is wha
the inside of their home looks like and
even political affiliations as well as
mutual acquaintances and I think this is
very very powerful that what used to
take a very very long time now all of a
sudden becomes instantaneous and what
sudden becomes instantaneous and wha
becomes instantaneous can easily be
taken for granted
and can also weather away quickly can
also wither away quickly
now let's look at the Islamic Paradigm
of how do you actually get to know
someone
he says you will not truly know an
individual till you've done one of four
things with an individual you've
traveled with a person you've done
business with a person you've eaten uh
with a person or you've spent the night
with a person or you've spent the nigh
with a person
now if you look at these four things
that um
highlights what is
trying to highlight for us
so with regards to traveling with a
person you get to see their personality
you get to see how stingy they are with
their resources how generous they are
with their resources what are they busy
doing as they're traveling are they busy
engaging of Allah are they just wasting
their time looking at what's happening
around them or perhaps they're engaged
in something Haram they're listening to
something they shouldn't be listening to
they're looking at something they
shouldn't be looking at right so that is
the element of traveling spending the
night you get to see their habits at
night you get to see their habits a
night time how closely do they follow
the Sunnah of making before they fall
asleep reciting reciting making their
before they fall asleep do they sleep on
the right hand side or not do they sleep
on their stomach you get to know all of
those things in terms of who they are as
individuals getting to do business with
them how honest and trustworthy are they
or are they deceptive and conniving
right and then obviously eating with
people there is a concept of cumulative
eating which doesn't exist as much but
eating which doesn't exist as much bu
the criminal eating was a big plagues to
come and everyone used to share with
that plate so now if there's a limited
amount of meat you watch to see a
person's personality then with that meat
person's personality then with that mea
are they going to hoard it all for
themselves or will they actually be
generous and take the pieces of the meat
generous and take the pieces of the mea
and put it in front of you so that you
can share from it as well so this is
what um
says that you will not truly get to know
a person up until you've done one of
these four things
now all of a sudden on social media
comes and you're like yeah I know what
comes and you're like yeah I know wha
their family looks like I know what
their family looks like I know wha
their favorite sports team are I know
what their what favorite restaurants are
you have the illusion of getting to know
them and this is why it's so important
them and this is why it's so importan
to highlight that it is an illusion and
you know the I'm going to keep coming
back to this it's not a reflection of
who they are it's a shadow right that
who they are it's a shadow right tha
darkness is what they're presenting
their perfect life is what they want you
to see
yet their losses as the brother
mentioned their secrets their faults and
shortcomings none of that is exposed
so what you think you may know of an
individual through social media you need
to keep reminding yourself this is not
to keep reminding yourself this is no
real
this is not real and I don't really know
this individual I don't really know this
individual
and then he talks about on how
traditionally before social media
relationships were two-way street in a
sense that if you wanted to converse
with someone you'd have to call them up
and have a conversation with them meet
and have a conversation with them mee
up with them person have a conversation
with them but now you have unilateral
relationships where you can follow
someone's social media and get to see
their world or what they want to present
their world or what they want to presen
of their world with them not even
interacting with you at all they do not
interacting with you at all they do no
even know that you exist yet you are
like going fine crazy over them right as
well I'll share like really bad examples
with you so um you know in these past
with you so um you know in these pas
couple of months a lot of images have
come out Allah knows best inshallah
they're not real but there's that uh
Korean pop band
um anyone know what I'm talking about
um anyone know what I'm talking abou
the
beat is it called BTS yeah okay
something along those lines but you had
someone and um with a BTS picture like
I'm making woman on behalf of this
person then we had the very famous
incident that when the queen passed away
we had that person and this was a real
sign that they're carrying that I'm
making omra on behalf of the queen right
making omra on behalf of the queen righ
and this is like the wild stuff that
and this is like the wild stuff tha
gets shared and where was I going with
this uh oh is that the obsession that
this uh oh is that the obsession tha
you developed with people that why on
Earth would you want to make omega for
BTS why would you want to make owner
afford the queen like or is there no one
else that you could think of but this
goes back to the level of obsession that
goes back to the level of obsession tha
we as human beings develop for
individuals that it'll even lead you to
doing nonsensical things it will even
lead you to doing nonsensical things
so it's very important that you
understand that the people that you
follow on social media most of them
don't know that you exist if they do
know that you exist they don't care
about you
so you should have the exact same level
of concern and love for them as well
that yes if there's something beneficial
I'll take it but if there's no benefit
I'll take it but if there's no benefi
I'm not really concerned at what happens
in their lives I'm not really concerned
as to what happens in their lives
he mentions consider the example of a
casual acquaintance that you follow
online you rarely meet this person or
even exchange messages with them but you
see them posting a dozen times a day
about how much they dislike their family
or how annoying their parents are
what is the subconscious effect of
seeing these messages daily
so remember we're talking about
so remember we're talking abou
consumption and what you're exposed to
now so now as you're just following this
random acquaintance and this is like the
the danger of the of the tick tock world
and the the stories on Instagram is that
and the the stories on Instagram is tha
all the people that you follow and the
stories that they're sharing
you pretty much don't really have a
choice expect that you're exposed to it
choice expect that you're exposed to i
unless that you make an active effort to
not to be exposed to their stories
and if you click on their stories then
Instagram will naturally promote those
stories to you so now if there's someone
in your school and I'm speaking to the
younger people here that perhaps isn't
younger people here that perhaps isn'
the most practicing of people perhaps
doesn't have the best of of Islamic
values and they openly better rate their
parents and speak bad of them they speak
bad about their Community they speak bad
about something else and this is all
they do but you keep telling yourself
and you justified in your head that this
person is in my class and I interact
person is in my class and I interac
with them day to day you know we should
be friends on Instagram we should be
friends on social media
but if you're constantly exposed to
someone speaking bad about their parents
what do you think that's going to do to
you one day that one day you're going to
wake up and you're going to think you
know what my parents are terrible as
well they don't let me do what I want to
do they restrict my freedom they don't
do they restrict my freedom they don'
let me hang out with who I want to hang
out they don't let me go out late at
out they don't let me go out late a
night my parents are just as bad
and it drops that that seedling of evil
in your mind that will naturally grow
and this is why one of the takeaways
from this is that you have to be so
careful as to who you allow on your feet
careful as to who you allow on your fee
that just because you met at an event
that just because you met at an even
just because a person is in your class
it doesn't mean that you need to follow
them it doesn't mean that you need to
interact with their stories you need to
be very selective in terms of who you
allow into your mind your mind is the
most valuable space that you own you
can't let these people live their rent
can't let these people live their ren
free right you can't let these people
live there rent free
he goes on to say and consider the
example of a celebrity that you admire
and follow they may post something
useful and interesting content or even
promote products you're interested in
purchasing but what is the effect when
you regularly see pictures they post
you regularly see pictures they pos
that may be inappropriate that may be
inappropriate and I think speaking to
the sisters here is going to be very
very important because for a period of
time we had uh
social one female Muslim social media
influencers that were promoting a modest
influencers that were promoting a modes
lifestyle so promoting clothing that was
very very modest promoting gel Bob's
promoting hijabs promoting that modest
promoting hijabs promoting that modes
lifestyle but eventually what ends up
happening is that there's so much under
the Limelight
the Limeligh
and also there's so much money being
thrown at them in terms of promotional
content and ads
that they have to make a conscious
decision do I continue with this modest
decision do I continue with this modes
lifestyle or do I choose to take off my
hijab and you find so many female Muslim
social media influencers that end up
taking off their hijab and for me this
is something that we need to think about
is something that we need to think abou
because when they take off their hijab
as soon as there's a sister that is even
remotely struggling with it they find
validation in this action and this is
something I think from a Brother's point
something I think from a Brother's poin
we're not going to understand the
struggles that sisters go through in
terms of wearing hijab so it's not a
place to be judgmental it's not a place
to condemn but it's a police to
understand the negative impact that
understand the negative impact tha
these social media influencers can have
on our lives and even for our daughters
that are consciously following them and
we're okay with it because they're
Muslim and they're promoting a modest
Muslim and they're promoting a modes
lifestyle
but if we look at back at the statements
of our predecessors they remind us that
of our predecessors they remind us tha
the living are not safe from fitzma the
living are not safe from fitzma
that it's not about how they're living
their lives it's about how they will
pass away how did they live their life
when they passed away
so this is something that's very
important to keep in mind that even
these people that were following
eventually some sort of Haram is going
to crouch in either the way that they
dress the things that they're promoting
and you may tell yourself I'm
comfortable in my foundations of Islam
you know I I know what's Halal and Haram
I'm not going to end up all the way in
in their footsteps
but what we don't realize is the
desensitization
to the Haram the desensitization to the
Haram
you see someone drinking alcohol you're
like I'm never going to do that
like I'm never going to do tha
but the more you get exposed to it the
more the less you hate alcohol because
someone that you like someone that you
admire is actually doing it
admire is actually doing i
you see someone that's having
promiscuous relationships and something
what you are meant to hate and dislike
all of a sudden you're like and you know
what that's their business as long as
I'm not doing it it's okay but that's
not what our Dean teaches us our Dean
teaches us that if you see something
wrong you change it with your hands if
you're unable to change it with your
hands you speak out against it if you're
unable to speak out against it you hate
it in your heart and social media is
even taking away that last element of
you hating it with your heart because
someone that you like someone that you
follow someone that you admire is doing
it if you hate their actions you're
going to end up hating them and your
mind won't allow that to happen because
perhaps you benefited them or perhaps
you enjoy their lifestyle or whatever it
you enjoy their lifestyle or whatever i
may be or for whatever it may be
we're going to move into the last couple
of sections I know we've we've gone uh
on quite a bit mashallah one of the
pitfalls of social media networking is
the idea of hyper connectivity the
abundance of Superfluous connections
sometimes gives a false impression of
meaningful interactions what does that
meaningful interactions what does tha
mean exactly he shares the example of a
football player on the Kansas City
Chiefs
one of his teammates ended up dying by
Suicide subhanallah and that very
morning they were having a conversation
through text message hey how is
everything going everything is great
everything going everything is grea
yeah x y and z
and the point that Omar is trying to
make over here is that if you look at
make over here is that if you look a
the way social media has impacted the
way that we interact with one another
that even though we may not intend to be
fake
we're definitely not being genuine we
may not intend to be fake but we're not
may not intend to be fake but we're no
being genuine so for example if I come
in today and I'm not feeling well you're
gonna see it you can see it on my face
my face may be pale I may have dark uh
Shadows under my eyes my energy is
really low so when you ask me how are
you doing today and I said alhamdulillah
not wanting to complain you know
praising Allah in all situations even
though I'm saying alhamdulillah you're
able to tell okay he's not a hundred
percent today
but as you're conversing with someone on
social media through text message
through WhatsApp whatever it may be and
so and you ask someone how are you doing
we've programmed ourselves to say
alhamdulillah
and that lets people's guard down the
person said alhamdulillah they must be
okay why would they lie to me it's not
okay why would they lie to me it's no
an active conversation that we're having
in our heads but this is what ends up
building up in the back of Rights the
fact that they said alhamdulillah
therefore they must be okay
but what we need to do over here is two
things number one is that we ourselves
need to learn to be honest and genuine
particularly with those that are closest
particularly with those that are closes
to us that if we're doing well say
alhamdulillah in all situations and
circumstances but I'm struggling today
I'm not feeling well I'm struggling with
work I'm struggling with school I'm
having a problem with my family
learn to be vulnerable with your closest
learn to be vulnerable with your closes
and most intimate people because if you
keep putting up this facade and you keep
letting things build up inside of you it
letting things build up inside of you i
will lead to severe psychological
emotional consequences
the counterpart to this is that when you
feel close to someone
going that extra step and asking them
hey are you actually doing okay I know
you said alhamdulillah you're okay but
you said alhamdulillah you're okay bu
is everything really okay
and actually asking them that question
and this is a part of you being that
and this is a part of you being tha
good friend that good brother and sister
you're going that extra step and
allowing them to confide in you allowing
them to confide in you so that you see
that even though we're hyperly connected
constantly in contact with another you
know constantly snapping one another
constantly what's happening one another
that deep genuine connection gets taken
away and that's what you actually need
to focus on that's what you actually
need to focus on
okay I want to share with you uh two
quotes from Adam
he has the famous
and that is his collection of Hadith
there are all authentic Hadith one of
his other collections of works is called
which basically deals with the character
of a Believer and Umar he quotes two
statements from them one from one from
um
he says
love the one whom you love moderately
perhaps one day he will be someone for
whom you have hatred and hate the one
whom you hate moderately perhaps one day
he will be the one whom you love and I
think let's stop over here so we're
speaking about those uh modesty
influencers that now they've taken off
their hijab they're no longer promoting
that modest lifestyle and what you loved
them for is no longer there so you have
to have be moderate in your love so that
to have be moderate in your love so tha
when they change and you can't love a
person's bad habits and you can't love a
person's sins you should allow yourself
that flexibility through that lack of
excess love to actually be able to
dislike the actions that they do to
actually be able to dislike the actions
that they do and then also the exact
that they do and then also the exac
opposite that perhaps someone who is an
enemy of Islam someone that has done
terrible terrible things when they
accept Islam are you able to love them
for their Islam and I think one of the
most recent examples was Andrew Tate
righ
it was such a a complicated situation
because you have allegations of rape
allegations of assault allegations of
profiting over the abuse of women all
those allegations are there but then all
of a sudden he accepts Islam
and it becomes a very complicated
situation do you feel happy about this
do you feel upset about this and how are
people impacted it remember we're
talking about the impact of social media
there was actually a very famous tweet
there was actually a very famous twee
that was rapidly shared by a lot of
people even you know Muslim speakers
about how this woman Muslim sister she
says that if Andrew Tate is platformed
within the Muslim Community I'm going to
leave Islam
right this was a tweet that was shared
publicly now the way we react to this
can be in a variety of ways be very
judgmental that the sister doesn't
judgmental that the sister doesn'
understand Islam that you know how can
she leave Islam over someone else being
platformed it shouldn't make sense but
platformed it shouldn't make sense bu
what we need to get at the Crux of
things is social media whether it is
real or not the impact is very very real
the impact is very very real what we
also want to extract from this is that
also want to extract from this is tha
there are complex scenarios and
situations
that yes Andrew Tate may have lived a
very bad life now that he accepts Islam
he is clear with Allah he is clear with
Allah
in order to become clear with humans he
needs to apologize and rectify he needs
to apologize and rectify
and then also moving forward he needs to
change his bad behavior he needs to
change his bad behavior and based upon
those things that is how the Muslim
Community should react with regards to
the Islam of someone like Andrew Tate it
the Islam of someone like Andrew Tate i
shouldn't be his Islam fixes all the
wrongs that he's done and he's forgiven
for everything that he will do nor is
that you know what we hold his mistakes
over his head and there's never going to
be Redemption for him but there's a more
nuanced approach that we need to have
with this then he shares a statement of
um
he says do not love your Let Your Love
be an obsession nor your hate be
destruction
he was asked how so he responded when
you love you are clingy like a child and
when you hate you wish Destruction for
your companion
and subhanallah I think this is like a a
science of our time
that someone that you follow does
something good and all of a sudden you
want to follow everything that you're
doing you want to know every single
update in their life
but as soon as they do something bad you
hate them and you wish Destruction for
them there's no balanced approach in our
lives anymore it's either everything or
nothing it's either everything or
nothing and then let's look at you know
the impact that it has and these are the
the final two or three points that we'll
conclude on this
one of the dangers of social media
is the Allure of connection
so all of these people and I'm speaking
to the older ones amongst us in our 30s
and in our 40s
that you want to connect with your old
high school classmates you want to
connect with people that you knew way
back in the day you want to know what's
going on in their lives and you justify
it with something innocent or I just
it with something innocent or I jus
want to see how they're doing
but little do we realize that
but little do we realize tha
particularly when it's with the opposite
to gender
that's what shaytan wants you to do just
that's what shaytan wants you to do jus
ask how are you doing
and then you relive all these childhood
you know things that happened for you as
a teenager when you're uh emotions were
running wild and you had no idea of what
running wild and you had no idea of wha
you what you were doing and where you
were going in life and perhaps you had
you know some Haram relationships
without actually doing something Haram
all that is rekindled in your head oh I
just want to see how she's doing
and that is how shaytan opens that door
for you and you could be married at this
time subhanallah and as soon as you have
a fight with your wife
shaytan comes to you and says you know
what why don't you go and tell this
person about it
person about i
and they start being your Confidant you
start hearing about your problems and
then they feel comfortable sharing their
problems with you
and then what was innocent of just
and then what was innocent of jus
wanting to know what they're up to in
life now becomes you having a very
secret relationship that you don't want
secret relationship that you don't wan
your wife to find out about
your wife to find out abou
and this is an emotional affair that's
taking place
often people think that what is Haram is
the physical Affair the prophet
the physical Affair the prophe
sallallahu alaihi wasallam warns us
against Zina
before it even takes place so the eyes
commit Zina the ears come in zinna the
tongue commit zinnah before the private
parts come in zinnah and you need to be
very very careful of that of this
deception of shaytan and how that
deception of shaytan and how tha
actually takes place
the second part we want to talk about
the second part we want to talk abou
is
nothing on social media is temporary
as soon as you put it out
as soon as you put it ou
it will be saved it will be archived it
it will be saved it will be archived i
will be screenshotted
so you may think that I'm sharing
something with a close friend I'm
sharing with someone that I'm eventually
going to marry they will never betray my
trus
but you don't control
once you've released something out in
the world of social media it's no longer
in your control anymore
and I think this is where parents need
to have a very serious conversation with
their children
what are the things that you're going to
post on social media
put out there
that even though you may not realize it
that even though you may not realize i
one day may be used against you one day
maybe used against you and I think let's
have an honest conversation with
Snapchat that one of the primary
functions of Snapchat was for you to be
able to send a picture that someone else
can't save so you can expose something
about yourself to another individual
that you don't want them to save and if
they take a screenshot you get a
notification that they took a screenshot
notification that they took a screensho
but the very premise was sending Haram
stuff that was the very premise of it
stuff that was the very premise of i
and then eventually and inshallah I hope
this is not happening in the Muslim
Community but sooner or later I know
that it's inevitable
you know you share something of yourself
or sister shares a picture of herself
without hijab to a brother that she
feels that she's going to marry on
Snapchat she feels that you know what
Snapchat she feels that you know wha
because Snapchat will delete it but he
takes that screenshot and he'll give you
a notification but you no longer control
what he can do with that picture
so you have to have a very serious
conversation with your kids about that
conversation with your kids about tha
about responsibility understanding who
your friends are and understanding that
your friends are and understanding tha
even though someone may be your friend
on social media it doesn't mean that
on social media it doesn't mean tha
they have your best interests in mind
what is more important is that you have
someone that who has your best interests
in mind wants what is best for you and
wants to protect you from harm that is
who you should be sharing your intimate
and content material with that is who
you should be sharing your intermediate
uh intermittent uh and private content
uh intermittent uh and private conten
with
the last thing we'll discuss is social
media as an MV amplifier it is easy to
look at someone's timeline and assume
that everything is perfect for them
they're sharing photos of their perfect
they're sharing photos of their perfec
family fancy foods and exotic vacation
meanwhile it feels like you are sitting
there with all of these problems and
struggles that no one else is dealing
with
this is a recipe for developing hasid
the same is true the other way around as
well be careful of what you share
because you may incite hasid in others
so now understanding this concept of
sharing the best version of yourselves
I think you know the one of the brothers
I shared that spoke about sharing your
losses online
we need to change that culture like we
need to
create a culture of online where it's
all right to share your losses hey I
didn't get the job that I wanted hey you
know
um I didn't you know the relationship
that that I was in my marriage it broke
down hey you know the school that I
wanted to get into I didn't get into it
wanted to get into I didn't get into i
there should be this culture of being
authentic
and being your true and authentic self
and I think that'll be doing wonders for
for people as mental health because
oftentimes when you're on social media
taking a logical approach to reminding
yourself that this is not real is very
very difficult that we just assume that
very difficult that we just assume tha
what we see is real because that was
what we're trying to believe if you see
something it must be real
but that couldn't be further from the
truth everything is manipulated
everything is doctored everything is
controlled in the way that is presented
to you so make sure that you're not
to you so make sure that you're no
developing has said for yourself
and one thing that I cannot emphasize
enough is that if you see something from
your fellow brother or sister
that you like and that you want your
natural reaction should be
Allahu Allah
that oh Allah bless them in it oh Allah
bless them in it this is how you protect
bless them in it this is how you protec
yourself from getting envious and
jealous and this is also how you protect
jealous and this is also how you protec
the impact of the evil eye by making Dua
for them and then the vice versa of it
for them and then the vice versa of i
is true that having this frame of mind
that I need to share everything as it
that I need to share everything as i
happens I understand we want to share
things with our family and friends that
things with our family and friends tha
we've done that we've experienced that
we've done that we've experienced tha
are really cool but you don't have to do
it in lifetime
wait a day or two wait a couple of hours
so that if even if someone is jealous it
so that if even if someone is jealous i
can't have an instantaneous impact
can't have an instantaneous impac
because it's already preceded and that
because it's already preceded and tha
is how jealousy works it has an
instantaneous impact one of the sahabi
was walking he didn't have his shirt on
looked very good one of the other sahaba
saw them gave him the evil eye
eventually fell down and became
paralyzed went into a commentative state
the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
commanded that the person that gave them
the evil eye make will do would that
the evil eye make will do would tha
water then that person is washed and
that is how the iron was removed so this
shows us that when you do things in
lifetime and you're streaming things in
lifetime and posting things in lifetime
you are inciting problems for yourself
always leave a buffer let that moment go
by and then share it and that's how
you'll save yourself from past it as
well
and this concept of what you give out
and this concept of what you give ou
into the world meaning if you seek
Baraka for others I believe this is true
as well if we protect ourselves from
giving others the evil eye this will
also be a way for us to protect
also be a way for us to protec
ourselves from getting the evil eye as
well
um I'm just going to conclude with the
action points now within even though
there are two other points I wanted to
discuss so action points for chapter
number two
number one curate your feet unfollow
unfriend mute and block ruthlessly the
same way an elite athlete protects your
body from eating junk is the same way we
need to protect our minds and Hearts
from consuming junk
right so curate your feed unfollow
unfriend mute and block number two focus
on cultivating relationships change your
focus from accumulating more friends and
followers to cultivating their
relationships with close friends that
relationships with close friends tha
you do actually have right this whole
delusion of I need to you know get as
many followers as I can possibly get now
it's getting so ridiculous that people
on their CVS are like yeah I have one
million views on Ticky talk and I'm like
why is this on someone's CV right I have
a hundred thousand followers on
Instagram who cares how is this going to
impact your career like unless you're a
social media marketer it's completely
irrelevant but people love to brag and
post about these things from a Muslims
perspective focus more on cultivating
the relationships that you have and then
last but not least watch what you share
scroll back through a post history take
account of what you've posted and why
look for instances where perhaps you may
have over shared like intimate details
or had an intention to show something
off
and if that was present then fix your
feed and take those things off of your
social media take those things off of
your social media we'll conclude with
that I know I went uh really over time
please forgive me for that but I want to
allow some time for questions and
discussion so particularly with regards
to intentions and neutrality
particularly with regards to curating
our feed cultivating relationships and
watching what we share do you have a
story that you want to share a comment
story that you want to share a commen
or if you have a question that you would
like to discuss as a group now is your
time to do it with
no no leave it on leave it on inshallah
yeah
yeah comments questions concerns go
ahead
I use that um
just watching
conversation or just over
excellent accent so the sister's
question is about consumption of
entertainment and what that looks like
and what is the approach that one should
have towards that and I think the same
approach that we're trying to develop
towards social media is what we want to
develop towards the things that we watch
and the things that we listen to as well
so understanding that just because
something is a fad is something that is
being massively spoken about it doesn't
being massively spoken about it doesn'
mean I necessarily need to be partaking
in it no matter how much I want to be
you know involved and integrated into
these facts the clearest example I can
give you is the tide pod fat where these
young stupid kids were taking Tide Pods
and and drinking it and eating and stuff
and they're ending up in the emergency
room right just because it's a fact so
you have to be very careful of the
content that you're getting contact
content that you're getting contac
getting caught up in with regards to
Feds that create a love of comfort in
yourself that I am okay not not doing
the latest and trendiest fat especially
if it's something that's harmful
especially if it's something that's
harmful number two
is that when it comes to entertainment
is that when it comes to entertainmen
is there a way to filter out
is there a way to filter ou
the things that we watch and this is
coming up in a later chapter but Allah
he tells us
that indeed one's hearing
and one seeing and one's heart these are
all things that we will be questioned
abou
that not a word is uttered except that
that not a word is uttered except tha
angels are writing down everything that
angels are writing down everything tha
you are saying so is there a way to
filter out what we're watching
and this means that you go into
different websites and read reviews
and then see is this something that I
feel okay exposing myself to
and this can be from the promotion of
certain ideologies and agendas this can
be from scenes of intimacy this can even
be you know things that are just
be you know things that are jus
completely unislamic like magic and and
things of that nature right so read the
review about it first and then make a
conscious decision of is this something
that I want to expose myself to
number three is that supporting those
platforms that are actually trying to
create Halal content so you have
something like ushub I think I hope I'm
pronouncing it right usherb is like a
Muslim Netflix
where they filter out a whole bunch of
content and they only want to present to
you that which is halal and people may
think yes it's not as entertaining yes
it's not as interesting but at the end
of the day you have to understand that
of the day you have to understand tha
everyone needs to start from somewhere
and that if we are not investing in our
own platforms to create Halal content
own platforms to create Halal conten
for us and to promote Halal content to
us
then how can we expect to view that
then how can we expect to view tha
Halal content right we'll always be at
Halal content right we'll always be a
the mitigating the lesser of the two
evils and you don't always want to be in
that approach
so the general rule of thumb is that yes
things that are beneficial Allah
but at the end of the day what your eyes
see and what your ears hear you will be
questioned about as well do your due
diligence before you expose yourself to
it and ask yourself do I feel
comfortable meeting Allah
having watched this or having heard this
if the answer to that is yes go ahead
and put in proceed if the answer to that
and put in proceed if the answer to tha
is I feel uncomfortable then maybe
second guess you're actually watching
and hearing it I hope that helps a lot
and hearing it I hope that helps a lo
Knows Best
Knows Bes
anything from the brothers questions
stories comments go ahead yeah
uh
wha
what would you recommend
excellent I I think that's uh such a a
great question to ask so the brothers
question and for those that are having
side conversations can you please stop
because it's distracting myself and
others here inshallah
um so with regards to people if the
comments that people people post online
particularly on lectures of Islam
particularly on posts by Muslim speakers
they'll promote things against Islam
promote things against the Muslim
Community how do you react to that how
do you react to that
do you react to tha
one thing that I've learned by
experience
is that you will never or you will
Almost Never convince someone online
that your logical approach is if I can
refute all of their arguments they will
accept Islam
that is not true if I can convince them
that Islam is the truth they will stop
hating Muslims that isn't true so that's
the first thing that you need to
understand that at the end of the day
this person is a creation of the
circumstances that they're in and what
circumstances that they're in and wha
they've been exposed to
so perhaps whatever they're saying I
don't need to take personally because
one they may not have the true picture
of Islam and in the Muslim Community or
number two they're evil and they're
misguided and you know what I don't need
to pay attention to something like that
to pay attention to something like tha
report the comment block the individual
and move on with your life but in terms
of interacting with it you want to say
something I'll get to you in a second
but in terms of interacting with that
but in terms of interacting with tha
comment I don't see any fruit in
interacting with those comments like
very rarely
if someone is sincere they're not going
to post a comment on the YouTube lecture
they're not going to post a comment on
Facebook to learn about Islam if they're
sincere they'll go and find a Muslim in
their Community they'll go out and reach
out to their local mosque they'll go to
their local University go to the local
library they're not going to be posting
that comment on YouTube for sincerely
educating themselves so if that is the
case and you recognize that interacting
with them is going to be fruitless so if
it's having an impact block report and
move on with your life
go ahead what were you going to say
foreign
well it makes sense like you know for
profession in the question
you know me personally I would you know
if
it's defended in the properly involved
manner then yes but otherwise
like you said there's no way you're
gonna change his his opinion but maybe
anyone else is probably different right
I respect your approach and may Allah
rewards you for your good and Noble
intentions and the actions that you're
taking but I think there's a layer to
this that also needs to be recognized is
that we have so many robots and trolls
that aren't even real right so when
you're interacting with these robots and
trolls they just magnify and make things
so much worse and number two I think
about being honest as well that even
looking from our own experience
how often do you come across someone's
comment on a YouTube section and you're
like you know what I agree with this
person I'm going to completely change my
mind on this issue
in comments and I completely get it but
in comments and I completely get it bu
it's for more for the sake of
entertainment the reading comments for
the sake of entertainment not for the
sake of being educated
right so I think the response to this is
why not create beneficial content on
tick tock on YouTube that responds to
those comments but not in that section
there so those that are generally
sincere they'll find it but no one goes
into a comment section generally sincere
of wanting their idea all or their ideas
challenged right and I think that's
where we just get so caught up on these
online debates and we have a section on
this coming up it's just a lot of waste
of time a lot of wasted energy and
emotion and uh very little fruit that
emotion and uh very little fruit tha
comes out of it and Allah help us and
protect us go ahead
so there is a a command from Allah that
so there is a a command from Allah tha
says
that is for the blessings of your lord
speak about them so we are commanded to
share the blessings that Allah has given
us for the sake of inciting gratitude in
other people right and for the sake of
inspiring people as well so an example
someone isn't able to have a a child
after many many years Allah finally
blesses them with a child
in that sort of situation you want to
share your story that look we tried hard
we made a lot of Dua and alhamdulillah
finally blessed us with a child
but you don't want to do it the day you
have your child let a week go by let two
weeks go by and that is how you share
that news right and this is the problem
with instantaneously sharing your
blessings you're also instantaneously
opening the door for hasid and that's
what we want to protect so share your
blessings
with the right intentions of course but
with the right intentions of course bu
leave some Gap with it leave some Gap
with it to protect yourself from the
evil eye knows best go ahead
yeah because evil eye only happens at
yeah because evil eye only happens a
that moment right so for example someone
shares that we just got married
you know if you're sharing it the day
that you got married
instantaneous impact takes place because
this is the the impact of the iron is
that it happens right to there and then
it's not like a gradual effect that will
happen weeks later or something like
that right where so if you share this
news you've already solidified to the
relationship the likelihood of iron
taking place after is a lot more
mitigated and minimized
yeah
okay let's conclude with that inshallah
subhanallah
to everyone for attending and inshallah
we'll see you next week uh at 7 30 where
we will be starting chapter number three
which I believe is about the phone
if I'm not mistaken chapter number three
is about the phone so we'll see you guys
next week